Add repository guidelines and list of repositories (#105)
cilium/community: REPOSITORY-GUIDELINES.md

# Repository Guidelines

This document describes the scope, status, and lifecycle of repositories within [Cilium](https://github.com/cilium).

You can find the list of all repositories, along with their scope and status, in [REPOSITORIES.md](https://github.com/cilium/community/blob/main/REPOSITORIES.md).

**Table of Contents**

* [Scope](#scope)
  * [```Core```](#core)
  * [```Ecosystem```](#ecosystem)
  * [```Infra```](#infra)
  * [```Special```](#special)
* [Status](#status)
  * [```STABLE```](#stable)
  * [```INCUBATING```](#incubating)
  * [```SANDBOX```](#sandbox)
  * [```DEPRECATED```](#deprecated)
* [Lifecycle](#lifecycle)
  * [Addition](#addition)
    * [Adding ```Core``` repositories](#adding-core-repositories)
  * [Change of scope or status](#change-of-scope-or-status)
    * [Archival](#archival)
* [Credit](#credit)

## Scope

Each repository within the Cilium GitHub organization is assigned one of four scopes: ```Core```, ```Ecosystem```, ```Infra```, or ```Special```. This assigned scope helps to convey each repository's purpose and responsibility in the overall functioning of the project.

> ### ```Core```

Reviewer: maybe rather than "core" we should name it something to reflect that these are the end user facing projects/repos

Core repositories are at the heart of the Cilium project, and represent its most essential functioning. They are the most active in terms of both contributions and use cases, and represent the repositories that adopters will typically interact with most often.

> Notable repositories of this type include [Cilium](https://github.com/cilium/cilium), [eBPF](https://github.com/cilium/ebpf), [Hubble](https://github.com/cilium/hubble), and [Tetragon](https://github.com/cilium/tetragon).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notable repositories of this type include [Cilium](https://github.com/cilium/cilium), [eBPF-go](https://github.com/cilium/ebpf), [Hubble](https://github.com/cilium/hubble), and [Tetragon](https://github.com/cilium/tetragon).
```

### ```Infra```

Infrastructure repositories are those that are required to keep the Cilium project running smoothly, and are not designed to be used by adopters.

Examples of repositories of this type include development and testing tools like [little-vm-helper](https://github.com/cilium/little-vm-helper), or those helping with the overall contribution process like [github-actions](https://github.com/cilium/github-actions).

You can find the list of all ```Infra``` repositories in [REPOSITORIES.md](https://github.com/cilium/community/blob/main/REPOSITORIES.md#infra-scope).

### ```Special```

Special repositories are those where assigning a status is not appropriate. They are generally not designed to be used by adoptors.

They include the [Community](https://github.com/cilium/community) and [.github](https://github.com/cilium/.github) repository, template repositories like [design-cfps](https://github.com/cilium/design-cfps), as well as all forks.

You can find the list of all ```Special``` repositories in [REPOSITORIES.md](https://github.com/cilium/community/blob/main/REPOSITORIES.md#special-scope).

> ## Status

Reviewer: I've discussed this a bit with Joe and we think that for now, we shouldn't have status except for deprecated. It adds more process without much benefit for end users and seems to add more "guarantees" about the software that the license doesn't actually agree with.

For core repos, end users can either choose to adopt or not depending on their needs while the other ones are just up to project members to choose and it is up to them to also keep the repos/projects up to date with their needs.

Author: Ok, I can take the status parts out. That does make it a lot simpler

* Pre-built artifacts are published by an automated system for multiple platforms (when applicable)
* Documented release process (when applicable)

### ```INCUBATING```

Incubating repositories are those in an intermediate stage of maturity, and are more subject to significant changes and updates as they continue to grow. They may be used by adoptors with the caution that their support may vary and they are generally not appropriate for critical use cases.

Criteria for ```INCUBATING``` status include:
* Supported by at least two committers
* Basic documentation is provided
* Minimal CI/CD pipelines are implemented (when applicable)

### ```SANDBOX```

Sandbox repositories are in the earliest stage of maturity. They are not recommended to be used in production, but could be used by those who want to experiment with new features. Very little to no support is provided.

### ```DEPRECATED```

Deprecated repositories are those that are no longer maintained and are only kept for historical purposes. They are not recommended for use by adoptors. They are typically [archived](#archival) and read-only.

## Lifecycle

### Addition

> Repositories of type ```Ecosystem```, ```Infra```, or ```Special``` can be added into the GitHub organization at the discretion of the Cilium committers (in other words, by lazy consensus).

Reviewer: could use and issue template similar to https://github.com/falcosecurity/evolution/issues/new?assignees=&labels=kind%2Fsandbox&projects=&template=repo_sandbox_request.md&title=

Any new repository of any type must be added into the appropriate list in [REPOSITORIES.md](https://github.com/cilium/community/blob/main/REPOSITORIES.md) and be assigned a status (if applicable).

#### Adding ```Core``` repositories

> Given their importance to the project, repositories of the ```Core``` type must be added through a more formal process:

Reviewer: since they are end user facing, they could potentially change the scope of the project which is why it needs to be a bit more formal

>   - The new project is proposed by a committer via a GitHub issue discussion in one of the existing projects in the organization. Part of the discussion should include whether the proposed project [meets the requirements](#stable) to be assigned a ```STABLE``` status.

Reviewer: we should have a template for this, maybe could be a bit similar to https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/issues/new?assignees=&labels=donation&projects=&template=donation.yml&title=%5BDonation+Proposal%5D%3A+

  - The discussion is open to all, and people in the community are encouraged to participate. While voting is exclusive to committers, this discussion is useful for those with voting power to understand the perception of the wider Cilium community.
  - Once sufficient discussion has taken place (for example, 3-5 business days), the committers decide if it should be added via a simple majority vote.
  - If the proposed project is accepted and added to the Cilium GitHub organization, it is then added to the list in [REPOSITORIES.md](https://github.com/cilium/community/blob/main/REPOSITORIES.md#core-scope) and is assigned the ```STABLE``` status.

### Change of scope or status

As a repository increases or decreases in activity, it may become appropriate to pursue a change in status or scope. For most cases, this can be done via lazy consensus by a Cilium committer. Particularly careful consideration should be taken when changing a status from ```INCUBATING``` to ```STABLE```.

> The only exception to this process is when pursuing a ```Core``` scope, upon which the process described in [Adding ```Core``` repositories](#adding-core-repositories) is followed.

Reviewer: with the above comment, we can probably remove this for now

> #### Archival

Reviewer: maybe we should do a issue template similar to https://github.com/falcosecurity/evolution/issues/new?assignees=&labels=kind%2Fdeprecated&projects=&template=repo_deprecation_request.md&title=

Reviewer: Then I would also say it is lazy consensus from the project maintainers

Repositories that have shown little activity in over a year may be a good candidate for archival. Archived repositories are given the ```DEPRECATED``` status, are read-only, and are no longer maintained.

If they hold historical or other useful purposes, they will remain as an archived repository within the Cilium GitHub organization.

> If they have little relevance or purpose to add to the project, they can be moved to the [Cilium Projects Retirement Home](). This ensures that there continues to be a recorded history of the project while also ensuring only relevant repositories are kept within the main Cilium organization.

Author: Lines 125 & 127 can be taken out if we don't want to pursue the retirement home option

# Repository Guidelines

This document describes the scope and lifecycle of repositories within [Cilium](https://github.com/cilium).

You can find the list of all repositories, sorted by their scope, in [REPOSITORIES.md](https://github.com/cilium/community/blob/main/REPOSITORIES.md).

**Table of Contents**

* [Scope](#scope)
  * [```Core```](#core)
  * [```Ecosystem```](#ecosystem)

>   * [```Internal```](#internal)

Reviewer: @katiestruthers shouldn't this be historical now? I think we removed internal

You can find the list of all ```Ecosystem``` repositories in [REPOSITORIES.md](https://github.com/cilium/community/blob/main/REPOSITORIES.md#ecosystem-scope).

### ```Historical```

Historical repositories are considered deprecated, are no longer maintained, and are converted to an archived, read-only state. They are not recommended for use by adoptors.

Repositories that have been inactive for quite some time may be good candidates for archival. They can be proposed through the same process as other [changes of scope](#change-of-scope).

You can find the list of all ```Historical``` repositories in [REPOSITORIES.md](https://github.com/cilium/community/blob/main/REPOSITORIES.md#historical-scope).

## Lifecycle

### Addition

New repositories of any type can be proposed by using the [New Repository Template]() and can be approved via the process as described in [Approval process](#approval-process). This includes both donated repositories or the creation of new repositories.

In order for a new repository to be approved, it must also meet the following criteria:

- Approved by at least two committers
- README describes the intent of the repository and has usage examples

> - Adheres to one of the [approved license policies](https://github.com/cncf/foundation/blob/main/allowed-third-party-license-policy.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Adheres to one of the [approved licenses](https://github.com/cncf/foundation/blob/main/allowed-third-party-license-policy.md)
```

Any new repository must be added into the appropriate list in [REPOSITORIES.md](https://github.com/cilium/community/blob/main/REPOSITORIES.md).

### Change of scope

If a repository's level of activity significantly changes and/or it modifies its purpose over time, it may become appropriate to pursue a change in scope. This change can be proposed by using the [Change of Scope Template]() and can be approved via the process as described in [Approval process](#approval-process).

Any approved change of scope must be reflected in [REPOSITORIES.md](https://github.com/cilium/community/blob/main/REPOSITORIES.md).

### Approval process

All changes that occur within the lifecycle of a repository have the same approval process:

- An issue is opened via the appropriate issue template ([New Repository Template]() or [Change of Scope Template]())
- Once the issue is opened, ample opportunity for discussion among both committers and the larger Cilium community is provided (for example, 1 week)

> - If there are no objections among committers and any relevant criteria are met (for example, the criteria found in [Addition](#addition)), the change is approved
> - If there are objections among committers but they can be worked through amicably, and any relevant criteria are met, the change is approved

Reviewer 2: We could probably reorder these two and simplify the "objections" case: Usually when it comes to any proposals in the Cilium project, we don't assume the proposal is perfect the first time and either gets accepted or rejected. Rather, someone opens a proposal, then there is a comment period, which may lead to some discussion and changes, then ultimately that discussion leads the proposal to the final result. With that in mind:
```suggestion
- If the discussion suggests an alternate path should be pursued, then that discussion should be resolved prior to approval. 
- If there are no objections among committers and any relevant criteria are met (for example, the criteria found in [Addition](#addition)), the change is approved
```

Then the "rare case" below clearly defines what happens if the above steps do not result in a conclusive decision.

### ```Core```

Core repositories are at the heart of the Cilium project, and represent its most essential functioning. They are the most active in terms of both contributions and use cases, and represent the repositories that adopters will typically interact with most often.

Notable repositories of this type include [Cilium](https://github.com/cilium/cilium), [eBPF-go](https://github.com/cilium/ebpf), [Hubble](https://github.com/cilium/hubble), and [Tetragon](https://github.com/cilium/tetragon).

You can find the list of all ```Core``` repositories in [REPOSITORIES.md](https://github.com/cilium/community/blob/main/REPOSITORIES.md#core-scope).

### ```Ecosystem```

Ecosystem repositories are extensions of the core project, providing optional functionality that adopters may find useful. While not considered essential, they play a pivotal role of addressing a range of use cases and needs for Cilium adoptors.

> Examples of repositories of this type include useful Go libraries like [Fake](https://github.com/cilium/fake), or repositories designed to integrate Cilium with other projects like [Proxy](https://github.com/cilium/proxy).

Reviewer 2: Is cilium/fake intended for adopters?

Author: Moved it to Infra!

You can find the list of all ```Ecosystem``` repositories in [REPOSITORIES.md](https://github.com/cilium/community/blob/main/REPOSITORIES.md#ecosystem-scope).

### ```Infra```

Infrastructure repositories are those that are required to keep the Cilium project running smoothly, and are not designed to be used by adopters.

Examples of repositories of this type include development and testing tools like [little-vm-helper](https://github.com/cilium/little-vm-helper), or those helping with the overall contribution process like [github-actions](https://github.com/cilium/github-actions).

You can find the list of all ```Infra``` repositories in [REPOSITORIES.md](https://github.com/cilium/community/blob/main/REPOSITORIES.md#infra-scope).

> ### ```Special```

Reviewer 2: I wonder whether we need to differentiate between "Infra" and "Special". Both seem to be repositories we use as a project to coordinate and develop functionality in the Core / Ecosystem categories.

Why keep them separate? Or, what would a combined category look like? For instance, would we name it `Internal` or `Supporting repositories` or something like that?

Author: That is true! I like combining them, and I like the name ```Internal```.

At one point we also had statuses, and so it didn't make sense to give something like cilium/community or forks a status. That is why they were originally separated into two groups.

### ```Historical```

Historical repositories are considered deprecated, are no longer maintained, and are converted to an archived, read-only state. They are not recommended for use by adoptors.

Repositories that have been inactive for quite some time may be good candidates for archival. They can be proposed through the same process as other [changes of scope](#change-of-scope).

You can find the list of all ```Historical``` repositories in [REPOSITORIES.md](https://github.com/cilium/community/blob/main/REPOSITORIES.md#historical-scope).

## Lifecycle

### Voting

All changes that occur within the lifecycle of a repository have the same process:

- An issue is opened via the appropriate issue template ([New Repository Template]() or [Change of Scope Template]())
- Once the issue is opened, ample opportunity for discussion among both committers and the larger Cilium community is provided (for example, 1 week)
- If there are no objections among committers during this time and any relevant criteria are met (for example, the criteria found in [Addition](#addition)), the change is approved

> - If there are any objections from committers, the committers decide if the change should be approved via a simple majority vote

Author: We could reduce the voting to ```Core``` repositories only (both adding a new ```Core``` repository or changing an existing repository's scope to ```Core```). 

Part of this document was to address #82 so I think that some sort of voting is still necessary, although we could greatly reduce how often it happens this way.

> - If there are any objections from committers, the committers decide if the change should be approved via a simple majority vote

Reviewer 2: Limiting to `Core` sounds more pragmatic, yeah. Beyond that, I'd also suggest that this document describe that the voting process should adhere to the standard process in the Cilium project (with link to that), just so that it's clear that all the rules are the same, for instance the way that voting blocks apply.

> - If there are any objections from committers, the committers decide if the change should be approved via a simple majority vote

Author: I have added some clarification, limiting formal voting to ```Core``` activities and linking to the appropriate voting section in our governance docs

> - If there are any objections from committers, the committers decide if the change should be approved via a simple majority vote

Reviewer: I think the intention here was never for it to actually come to a vote. As long as two committers think adding a repo is a good idea and no one objects then it is approved.

> - If there are any objections from committers, the committers decide if the change should be approved via a simple majority vote

Reviewer 2: :+1: I think the text could do with a little bit of wordsmithing on this front, I'm not sure it quite captures that sentiment as of now.

Generally speaking, this runs back to the way that we do decision-making in the project overall, and even this PR would be subject to a similar process - we'll refer this PR to the committers and provide a timeline to raise discussion, then assuming there are a couple of approvals and no objections/comments, we'll merge this PR.

> - If there are any objections from committers, the committers decide if the change should be approved via a simple majority vote

Author: Ok, I have modified it a bit to try to better communicate our intentions. I have taken off the limit to Core repositories.

### Addition

New repositories of any type can be proposed by using the [New Repository Template]() and can be approved via the process as described in [Voting](#voting).

In order for a new repository to be approved, it must also meet the following criteria:

> - Approved by at least two committers, with the assumption that any committer who approves is taking on the responsibility of maintaining the new repository

Reviewer 2: > with the assumption that any committer who approves is taking on the responsibility of maintaining the new repository

What does this mean?

Let's take https://github.com/cilium/state-writer as an example. After an initial flurry of activity, development goes quiet.

I suspect this requirement may lead to one of a couple of results:
- One, the committers who approve practically take no steps to maintain the repository. The person requesting the repository will maintain it, or it will become unmaintained after initial development.
- Two, committers may avoid approving PRs because the process says they're now responsible for this thing that they have no involvement in. Unless you can convince two committers to take responsibility, the request may end up in deadlock.

Author: Yes I can see how that could lead to problems, I can take it out. Perhaps just having two people approve of the new repository is sufficient

Reviewer: Maybe "maintain" is too strong a word here and something more like be the point of contact for would be better. Basically two people saying yes this is our idea contact us if you want to get involved

Reviewer 2: If we look at the list of all the repositories we have today, does that model make sense and how do you think we would document these owners?

For core repositories or other repositories where we're expecting active engagement from multiple community members, I think this totally makes sense. At the same time, I think there's a long tail of repositories where this doesn't really make sense and it's broadly fine for community members to just reach out on the #development Slack channel to ask about status / how to get involved. Typically someone will be around to redirect the queries or pull in someone who knows about the repo.

I'm not averse to having some documentation like this, but I think it would help these owners to define clearly what the expectations would be when they sign up to own such a repository. If it's just "contact us if you want to contribute to the new repository, and we'll figure out how to make that happen" then I think that's very reasonable, but let's state that clearly.

> - Basic documentation provided on the README

Reviewer 2: What is "Basic documentation"?

Perhaps:
- The README should describe the intent of the repository and have usage examples.

Author: I like it! Updated it here and on the new repository form.

- Adheres to one of the [approved license policies](https://github.com/cncf/foundation/blob/main/allowed-third-party-license-policy.md)

> Any new repository must be added into the appropriate list in [REPOSITORIES.md](https://github.com/cilium/community/blob/main/REPOSITORIES.md).

Reviewer 2: We may want to just turn these steps into part of the checklist on the issue template, for instance under a separate section "To be filled by a maintainer". Then the set of steps to configure the repository correctly would be in-line with the request, which would make it easier to ensure that the policy is followed.

Author: Added this step to both forms

### ```Special```

Special repositories are those that do not fit into the other three categories. They are generally not designed to be used by adoptors.

They include the [Community](https://github.com/cilium/community) and [.github](https://github.com/cilium/.github) repository, template repositories like [design-cfps](https://github.com/cilium/design-cfps), as well as all forks.

You can find the list of all ```Special``` repositories in [REPOSITORIES.md](https://github.com/cilium/community/blob/main/REPOSITORIES.md#special-scope).

## Lifecycle

### Voting

All changes that occur within the lifecycle of a repository have the same process:

- An issue is opened via the appropriate issue template ([New Repository Template](), [Change of Scope Template](), or [Repository Archival Template]())

> - Once the issue is opened, ample opportunity for discussion among both committers and the larger Cilium community is provided (for example, 3-5 business days)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Once the issue is opened, ample opportunity for discussion among both committers and the larger Cilium community is provided (for example, 1 week)
```
